[Music]
welcome to this special edition of the
minor consult last month I had the
privilege to sit down with Pulitzer
prize-winning author renowned researcher
and world-class physician Siddhartha
Mukherjee in front of a live audience at
Stanford
our conversation included stories from
his time as a Stanford undergrad
insights into his newest book song of
the cell and a peek behind the curtain
that revealed how he remains productive
in everything he does
so without further Ado let's get into
our episode Sid welcome it's it's
delightful to see you to be with you and
maybe
you could start out by talking about the
song of the cell and what motivated you
to uh to write the book and and also
about the progression of the first book
improval maladies on uh on cancer and
then genes in the genomic Revolution and
now the cell so can you talk about that
progression about your most recent book
sure um well first of all thank you for
um for welcoming me I came to this book
after the gene
um for for really two reasons
um the first reason was that
um it seems to be obvious to us but
actually it requires a little bit of
thinking through but
um
you know the word life and the word Gene
has started melding together the DNA
which is of course the source of of uh
carrying the the code of genetic code
has become such an icon of life that if
you see every time you see the word life
you see a molecule of DNA and that's
appropriate of course because as I said
it is the code of life I was in a in a
Botox Clinic outside Brazil not getting
Botox but walking by called The Life
Clinic and of course it had a piece of
DNA in it
and I thought to myself you know what's
interesting about DNA or or or this
whole idea this like this
absolutely spectacularly beautiful
molecule so beautiful that when it was
first
um modeled
um a scientist came up to look at it in
Cambridge came down to look it into the
basement uh or Watson and critical
working and said it's so beautiful that
it's got to be right
um so anyway so this has become such an
icon
um that we've forgotten that in fact
without the cell it's actually lifeless
it's a lifeless molecule you can swallow
it and it'll go right through your
system and it's a cell that brings it to
life
um
and in fact if there was to be
an icon of life it should really be the
cell
um it was dipped uh the prize was stolen
by this beautiful molecule but anyway
and that's partly because if I ask you
to draw a cell you'd say to me with cell
whatso uh neuron T cells B cells and
they all look different from each other
because they are so functionally diverse
um so I I sometimes
make a very simple comparison I say that
you know if you imagine life's music
being played out hence the title of this
book or one reason for the title of the
book
um as a score
um DNA is a score a score is not music
uh it's not a song you need someone to
play out that song and so you need the
cell uh to play out that song
um and just to bring that thought to its
full conclusion
um
the if you think about
for a long time the physicists used to
make fun of fun fun of us biologists and
say you know we were the poorer second
cousins or the third cousins you know
the the folks used to go get the coffee
um but
um we've had our three grand unifying
theories we as an biologists and by
extension people who work in medicine
have had our three grand unifying
theories since the 1950s so evolution
evolution by natural selection and Neo
Darwinism and so forth uh the second
being uh genetic theory the fact that
life is carried the instructions of life
is carried by code in fact happens to be
Universal throughout the entire living
Kingdom
and finally cell theory now the first
two have gotten a lot of attention you
can probably find 10 million books on
Evolution 10 million books on on genes
and genetics including my own but
somehow the cell again got jipped
um and and of these three grand theories
the three pillars on which are our whole
understanding of Life understanding of
biology sets the cell seems to be cell
seems to have gotten the short end of
the stick so I wanted to correct that
I'm saying this only how Precision we
have genuinely interested in in
restoring back this this third this
third pillar as it were
and the second reason is the excitement
um so the second reason is you know
we're doing things with cells that we
hadn't even imagined uh being able to do
five ten years ago we were just talking
about you know the things that we're
doing we're transplanting pancreatic
beta cells made out of es cells into
human beings so that they can make
Native insulin uh without having to uh
stick up needle in their arms every few
hours we are making uh you know we're
flirting dangerously with the idea of
making genetically altered uh uh
children
um but that dangerous flirtation comes
from the fact that you know 50 40 or 40
odd years ago we began to be able to
make children in a jar
um I shouldn't say children in the jar
the first embryo in a jar and then
transfer that embryo into a human until
that became a sentient human being so so
all of this was was the motivation to
start writing about this this revolution
that we're seeing happen in front of our
own eyes
sitting in all of your books you weave
together history and philosophy in
addition to the current Science and
Technology of the topic that you're
covering
why has that been important for you and
and how does that enable you to really
convey the type of message and story
that you want to convey well I think
history and philosophy history is
particularly interesting and I talk
about philosophy in a second but history
is pretty interesting because it shows
you process
um and it shows you and we'll come to
this in a second it shows you how many
times we've been wrong and why we've
been wrong what the misconceptions are
what the misconceptions
um and that humanizes the whole process
of science it allows people to
understand that we're not
um in medicine as well that we're not
omniscient human beings who make up
their mind in a binary way that there's
a literature that precedes us and
there's a literature that will both seed
us and that we live in in in the in the
Realms between these two and it was very
very obvious during the pandemic when
people will come up to scientists and
say you know make up your mind it's like
as if someone is holding a gun to your
and saying make up your mind you know is
it a or b and you'd say no it's actually
neither A or B because I need facts and
the facts will lead me to make a
conclusion about a and what will happen
is that in 10 days those facts will
change I'll have new information as
as John Maynard famously said you know
when facts change I change my mind what
do you do
um that doesn't mean that that we're
pursuing rubbish
and that's the important distinction it
means that we're pursuing a process
right and it's very important to remind
people that that process has been around
not yesterday not day before yesterday
but has been around for centuries and
that process has has merits as very
important merits and that if you
disrespect the process and if you throw
the process around as if it was nothing
you make a terrible mistake and those
mistakes are what people are the
mistakes that people have made in
history so so I think history you know
you may not care about
the first person who looked down a
microscope and made a decision or made a
conclusion about a cell but I care very
much because that person realized
something so you relive their excitement
but you also relive the process by which
they arrived at a conclusion and then
you in my often you really live the
process by which they have to disabuse
themselves of their own conclusions
sometimes or certainly of other people's
conclusions and I think that's very
important to convey that this is this is
much more Dynamic than you know than
checking off two boxes or one or two
boxes on on a multiple choice test
maybe relaying those thoughts than the
covid and the checking the box and how
did we do during covid in terms of as
scientists as physicians in
communicating the process and
communicating the uncertainty associated
with the process as well as the
uncertainty associated with the Stars
Kobe 2 virus and what it was going to do
as it evolved and what can we learn
moving forward so I would say C minus
um
and for various reasons we can go into
the reasons that you know if you want to
ask questions about that but C minus and
I think that we did that because uh the
first thing was
in order to try to convey a sense of
authority we confused Authority with
certainty
and those are not the same things
they're absolutely not the same thing uh
Authority means learning or or
convincing people that that the process
has Authority uh that the way that we
have adjudicate evidence that we know
how to adjudicate evidence and new
evidence keeps coming in and as the New
Evidence comes in we have the capacity
and we as a community have the capacity
to adjudicate that evidence
uh Authority and certainty are very
different certainty is when when you are
absolutely sure that you have to do
something and you know what the and you
understand also what the countervailing
arguments are and you understand what
the how the the risks and benefits
adjust themselves out such that you get
the you get the uh get the get the
solution so I think we confused all of
that and made a a tornado of confusion
um and of course you know it's easy to
point fingers and blame one person or
another person but I think the community
that the disservice and that was
Amplified by or already seeming and
sithering anti-science sentiments in the
United States but coming out out of all
of this and saying oh you know it's the
anti-science sentiment outside the
United States that's responsible for the
breakdown of communication
only presents out the story the other
half belongs to us how do we do better
moving forward I think we convey exactly
those things
um and and and reaffirm it in people the
idea and it's going to take a long time
because you know you have to rebuild
trust
um but reaffirm and reconfirm with with
all people
um that that there are methods that
these are not corrupted and corruptable
methods
um what I've what I've been calling
process scientific process
um and has been around for a long time
has worked for a long time worked during
covid when it was appropriately applied
um created new medicines I mean you know
it's it's astonishing to me
um how much uh bile has gone around
um vaccination
um remember this is a a vaccine that was
made in such record time the last
vaccine that was made if I remember
correctly
in time or or the timing for the making
of the last vaccine was the vaccine
against mumps that took four years
this took six eight six to eight months
to make a vaccine so you can imagine the
enormous benefits all around the world
not just around in the United States but
around the world of the of of Science
and it's it's various
um capacities and then
having done all of that having gained so
much ground we lost all that ground
because uh because actually we don't
know we don't know how often you know
how long that immunity lasts we don't
know whether what and and we are we are
now debating this this debate is
obviously an open Society debate
um and admitting that we don't know is a
good thing because then at least people
say to themselves okay these people
don't know their recommendations are
based on this much knowledge and I'll
make a decision whether whether whether
or not to do something or the other so I
think you know we started off on a very
very strong footing and and and as they
say we we uh you know we we pulled out
defeat from the jaws of Victory right
right
you you're a writer you're a scientist
you're a physician and you weave all of
those together and an entrepreneur you
weave all those together in your life on
a daily weekly quarterly yearly basis
how can you talk about how each one
contributes to the success of the other
and we have also a number of students
here today that I know look at your
career just as I and so many people do
is being inspiring and maybe you can
relate back to your days at Stanford and
did you have the vision of who you are
today when you were a student here and
how did it come together
oh I had no vision
um it wasn't I was wasn't as if I was
sitting in the quad planning my uh my
various careers I was too busy trying to
finish my math homework
which by the way I I can tell you a fun
story
um
almost everyone here is either in
medical school or is in biology Etc so
we must have taken mathematics but at
some point of time and and you know the
the the the the two most important rules
in mathematics
um which I tell my children and they
don't believe me still but I still think
are the two most important rules in
mathematics and maybe in biology
actually maybe in all science is write
big and have enough paper
how about an eraser
yes right big have enough paper and then
and have an eraser because
um because the problem is that it's
actually it's actually interestingly
true the problem is that if you write
small first of all you can't read what
you've written and secondly you you know
your thoughts become smaller and smaller
and smaller and smaller and so um there
used to be
um there used to be a because Stanford
had just recovered from the earthquake
so there used to be and I don't know
they still are because of course things
change and then they don't change there
used to be a series of trailers
um along uh Wilbur Drive
um and every evening
I would go and we would we organized our
own study section between friends uh
which was actually the only time I
learned anything
so and we would use the Blackboard as
our board to solve problems because you
can write big you can erase and you
never run out of paper so um but but
that's being facetious I mean the way
these feed into each other in a more
more substantive way is that that it's
not they're not coincidences in other
words each of these has something to do
with the other
um me being a physician I I right to
think
um very very often I will write
something and realize something as I'm
writing it that that if that's true then
something else must be true and if
something else must be true that must
prompt a kind of experiment a kind of
and it might be an experiment in looking
through literature looking through
research looking through history looking
through philosophy etc etc
um the entrepreneurship helps because it
is the ultimate way I don't think about
think of it as entrepreneurship I think
of it as
it is the ultimate proof of bringing
medicines alive
because if there are many reasons
medicines don't get made ultimately and
come out into the public but the
ultimate proof of a theory being right
um and and and being able to deal with
the complexities for me as a physician
scientist other people have different
mechanisms of of proving themselves out
but for me the ultimate proof is is that
becomes is it becoming is it becoming a
medicine and curing a disease because
that's after all what I care about as a
physician scientist uh the most
um so they all are related to each other
they Inspire each other they you know
one inspires the writing the writing
inspires the
experimentation the experimentation
there's sort of a dense web as it were
that somehow seems to work for me
um it's not for everyone other people
are you know there's a famous Hedgehog
and fox conundrum
um and
um I'm I often describe myself as you
know I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm a I'm a I'm
really a hedgehog disguised as a as a
fox
and if you don't know what the condom is
look it up
what excites you today
uh the book's out I'm sure you're
already thinking about the next book or
started yeah so so many things are
exciting today I think
um in the realm of science obviously
Cell Therapy we're just talking about
how cell therapy is exciting today
um bringing cell therapy to humans at
low cost
um I think one of the proudest things
I've done most recently is bring Cartoon
therapies to India
um and I saw there were tears in my eyes
when I I saw the first boy walk out with
relapsed a refractory all
uh cured
um that was probably the and he gave me
as he walked out he gave me a drawing
which I have in framed in my office a
drawing of an elephant
um and I now end my talks with that
drawing because
probably the most precious thing that
ever anyone's ever given to me and this
10 year old boy hopefully will now live
like Emily Whitehead is applying to
college sure
um she was seven when she had her
relapse of factory leukemia and this boy
left the hospital with no disease
so that's CR
um
so I'm excited about that that requires
a lot of engineering actually to bring
those costs down so I'm excited about
the role of engineering you're sitting
in an engineering building engineering
medicine
um
but I'm excited about all the new ideas
that all of you
completely bamboozle us with uh that we
never would have thought of before and
uh while we you know learn more from the
rest of you basically that's what's
exciting
that's great that's great
what um
we also
live in an ecosystem and you've been
involved in your work in India where
there are marked disparities in health
and health care and disparities in how
advances
come to the benefit of those outside of
sort of narrow regions that that have
Premier tertiary coronary care what are
your thoughts about how to certainly
what you're doing in India with car T
therapy but more broadly how we bring
more advances in medicine to the
developing world and also importantly
how do we address the social behavioral
environmental determinants that underlie
so much of human disease right so let's
I mean Also let's be clear I mean the
the the idea of bringing cartese to
India was is a little bit like sending a
rocket from India to the moon it's not
going to solve the the great social
disparities that that exist but I do
think that sometimes people miss the
mark on this
um
I think that when you do send a rocket
to the moon from a country like India or
make car keys available and and you know
the biggest believer in this was was
Paul Farmer
um who unfortunately passed away but the
biggest believer in this was Paul Farmer
because
Paul argued that in creating the
ecosystem
that
um that allows you to deliver T Cell
Therapies in India you
have to basically create
the ecosystem that then spreads out
into a much much broader Network
and it it's it's
um there are ineffable ways that that
ecosystem then flourishes it flourishes
through for instance
um
in which you can address cancer
prevention
uh ways in which you can address early
detection
behavioral change
social and social behavioral change and
so forth so I think that all of those
are are ultimately related
um
and that occupying the tip of the
ecosystem almost embarrasses the nation
they're thinking about why we're
occupying the tip of that ecosystem
and thereby sort of grips downwards and
it's not trickle down but it's it's
almost as if there's a sense of pride in
creating the ecosystem maintaining the
ecosystem like one maintains a garden
and then and then moving that ecosystem
forward so for instance through the
efforts on cartes in India which are
obviously the the the very pencil tip of
an ecosystem
um this is the first question that that
I get asked in India is you know which
which we would never get the attention
for by the way but because of that
reason the media becomes interested and
says well what should we do in India
about cancer
and the answer is not is not make more
cartesians the answer is stop smoking
sure
um and um and then all of a sudden you
get a headline in India which says you
know cartoon expert says India's main
job is to stop smoking
so you've now completed a kind of circle
and I think a virtuous circle
um in which you've disseminated
information from one very very local
part of the ecosystem to something much
much bigger which actually I care about
in the sense that again we're not going
to heal
uh the problems of the third world using
you know genetically engineered T cells
well we are going to cure uh many many
problems of the third world and other
parts of the world using behavioral
modification dietary modifications
and other forms of of change
um that that are important before we
open it up to questions there are two
questions I'd like to ask for each
person have the privilege of talking to
about leadership and the first is what
do you think are the most important
qualities of a leader today
um well I would say the the
um
probably just given what what we've seen
happen is is
the capacity
to admit defeat gracefully
um because it's a it seems to me that
half the world is in crisis because
about four or five people in the world
don't know how to say that we've lost
um and so
um
that seems to be a missing quality gone
missing in in leaders
um
um so that's that's one
um the other one is
um
which is related but also unrelated
um is is the capacity to to learn your
own limitations and learn your learn
where you end and where someone else's
expertise begins
um and this is something again we talked
a little bit about in the context of
science uh all scientists not all
scientists are great communicators
um let someone else help you who's done
this before if you feel as if you can't
do it yourself because ask for help when
you need help
um because there are people who actually
who know how to do this professionally
and and know how to how to make this
possible
and what gives you hope for the future
um
most people in this audience I think
um you know I love coming back to
Stanford because it makes me
uh very happy about sort of what's
Happening Here
as a university but in general in in
universities I mean the uh obviously I
got an absolutely spectacular education
here but uh but there was much more to
that more than that
um sort of I learned how to negotiate
the world
um and
um my only complaint back then I think
for Stanford University was that it was
two it was
too much still
um uh in its own head
um and I think that I've seen that
change very dramatically
um and I think that's one of the things
that has been really remarkable to us
wonderful well let's open it up for
questions from the audience hi I'm I'm
Denny Lund I'm the chief medical officer
here at the Children's Hospital and a
pediatric surgeon by training
so you've got a busy life
you're writing books you're an
oncologist Columbia you've got a family
you've got two little girls
talk about how you approach work-life
balance with all of that you know it's
very tough
um I sometimes say facetiously I think
it's overrated
but I don't think it is I think
that's one area that covet has shown
that
um that if you disrupt
normal work-life balance you actually
can be very very destructive to Mental
Health
um I've written about it it's in this
book actually
um
and um so I think it's very tough I
think the only way to do this is really
um well I take what I call Mini
sabbaticals of my own making from some
part of my life
so
um right now I'm taking sort of a mini
sabbatical from seeing patients I'm only
seeing patients that I'm that I see in
on a continual basis not taking new any
new ones
um I'm also taking a sort of a mini
sabbatical from writing so usually at
the end of when you bring a big book out
people want excerpts then they want more
uh they want you to write more about it
and they want you to and I I just told
my publisher you know I don't have any
words left in my brain so I'm not going
to write you know three more op-ed faces
pieces for the New York Times
um and so anyway that that that's how my
approaches is to really sort of it's
almost like medical triage so I see I
look after the sickest or or the ones
that are most urgently necessary now and
take minutes about because from other
parts of my life
yes
hi thank you so much for your talk uh
I'm showbo I'm an undergrad here
studying computer science very
interested in using tech for healthcare
delivery and um also very interested in
writing um actually leading helping to
co-lead one of the student Publications
on campus around biology and Healthcare
and Innovation
and I wanted to ask you I loved what you
said about writing to think and how you
use writing as a means to think and come
up with ideas and just wanted to ask
more about like what your writing
process looks like from like an idea to
a book or an idea to an op-ed uh-huh
um so
um
um as I suspect that my writing process
is a little bit uh unique
um uh I
well let me tell you several things
about it that I've slowly started
figuring out
um so when I'm in the middle of a book
or in the middle of a very large piece
let's say for the New Yorker you know
that could easily stretch into you know
writing a big major New Yorker piece
could it's like writing a small book
anyway
um
there is a process that goes through my
mind of being immersed in that book
especially if it's a book but even a
small op-ed in which I actually think
and I've been really trying to visualize
it I have a an internal conversation
and I actually think that my brain the
two parts of my brain the one that
produces words
actually sounds out those words as if
they were a sentence
um because you want your writing to have
that conversational quality about it
um and I think that parts of my brain
that are that listen to it and I and I
know this or I think this because I when
I write I need absolute silence even
like the small noises distract me
um and so and I and I think that that's
the reason is that I'm trying to listen
to my own voice in my head uh so
um a different way of putting it would
be that that I'm listening to voices in
my head is
called psychosis but
but there is a psychotic element to it
in the sense that you are really in that
moment or in that sphere and so my
process is very much that I need a lot
of isolation
um and I you know I take a sabbatical I
uh even at you know in the middle of the
book I often take a sabbatical from my
lab from my own lab so I assign projects
I meet people only for an hour or an
hour and a half during the day to make
sure that the products are alive and
they haven't died but then I go back
into my room shut the door complete
silence again you know Retreat and then
and then and then continue the writing
wonderful let's have a round of applause
to thank our guests
beautiful question thank you very much
and like thank you very much Sid thank
you for listening to the minor consult
with me Stanford School of Medicine Dean
Lloyd Miner I hope you enjoyed today's
discussion with song of the sale author
Siddhartha Mukherjee
please send your questions by email to
the minor consult at the
minorconsole.com and check out our
website the minorconsult.com for updates
episodes and more
to get the latest episodes of the minor
consult subscribe on Apple podcasts
Spotify Stitcher or wherever you listen
and if you enjoyed today's episode
please rate the podcast five stars your
feedback helps make this podcast happen
thank you so much for joining me today I
look forward to our next episode until
then stay safe stay well and be kind
[Music]
thank you